 



INTERNET-DRAFT                                              S. Moonesamy
Intended Status: Informational                                          
Expires: July 15, 2013                                  January 11, 2013


   Reclassifying Internet Registry Allocation Guidelines to Historic
                  draft-moonesamy-rfc2050-historic-00

Abstract

RFC 2050 describes the registry system for the distribution of globally
unique Internet address space and registry operations.  It also
discusses about policy issues which are outside the scope of the IETF. 
This document reclassifies RFC 2050 as Historic.  It also reclassifies
RFC 1366 and RFC 1466 as Historic. 

Status of this Memo

This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in
effect on the date of publication of this document. Please review these
documents carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this document
must include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
 


S. Moonesamy             Expires July 15, 2013                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Reclassifying RIR Guidelines      January 11, 2013


described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4







































 


S. Moonesamy             Expires July 15, 2013                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Reclassifying RIR Guidelines      January 11, 2013


1.  Introduction

   RFC 2050 [BCP12] describes the registry system for the distribution
   of globally unique Internet address space and registry operations. 
   It also describes the rules and guidelines governing the distribution
   of this address space.  RFC 2050 discusses about policy issues which
   are outside the scope of the IETF.  RFC 2860 [RFC2860] mentions the
   assignments of IP address blocks which are within the scope of the
   IETF.

   BCP 12 [BCP12] is no longer an accurate representation of the current
   practice as it has been overcome by events.  The role of the IETF is
   limited to providing guidance about IP architectural and operational
   considerations.  This document reclassifies RFC 2050 [BCP12] as
   Historic.  It also reclassifies RFC 1366 [RFC1366] and RFC 1466
   [RFC1466] as Historic.

2. Security Considerations

   The reclassification of RFCs about Internet Registry Allocation
   Guidelines is a procedural matter.  It does not affect the security
   of the Internet.

3. IANA Considerations

   This document does not request any action from IANA.

4.  References


   4.1.  Informative References

   [RFC1366]  Gerich, E., "Guidelines for Management of IP Address
              Space", RFC 1366, October 1992.

   [RFC1466]  Gerich, E., "Guidelines for Management of IP Address
              Space", RFC 1466, May 1993.

   [BCP12]    Hubbard, K., Kosters, M., Conrad, D., Karrenberg, D., and
              J. Postel, "Internet Registry IP Allocation Guidelines",
              BCP 12, RFC 2050, November 1996.

   [RFC2860]  Carpenter, B., Baker, F., and M. Roberts, "Memorandum of
              Understanding Concerning the Technical Work of the
              Internet Assigned Numbers Authority", RFC 2860, June 2000.



 


S. Moonesamy             Expires July 15, 2013                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Reclassifying RIR Guidelines      January 11, 2013


Authors' Addresses

   S. Moonesamy
   76, Ylang Ylang Avenue
   Quatre Bornes
   Mauritius

   EMail: sm+ietf@elandsys.com











































S. Moonesamy             Expires July 15, 2013                  [Page 4]
