 



INTERNET-DRAFT                                              S. Moonesamy
Intended Status: Informational                                          
Expires: June 7, 2013                                   December 4, 2012


                         Mailing list protocol
                 draft-moonesamy-mail-list-protocol-00

Abstract

This document discusses about a mailing list protocol.  This protocol is
not a protocol for communication devices.  It is a code of courtesy that
the reader may wish to extend to others to facilitate the exchange of
opinions and ideas, and to facilitate mailing list discussions.

Status of this Memo

This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in
effect on the date of publication of this document. Please review these
documents carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this document
must include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
described in the Simplified BSD License.
 


S. Moonesamy              Expires June 7, 2013                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Mailing list protocol          December 4, 2012


This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
Contributions published or made publicly available before November 10,
2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this material
may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow modifications of
such material outside the IETF Standards Process.  Without obtaining an
adequate license from the person(s) controlling the copyright in such
materials,this document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards
Process, and derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF
Standards Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
translate it into languages other than English.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2. Mailing list protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3. Internationalization Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   5. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5



























 


S. Moonesamy              Expires June 7, 2013                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Mailing list protocol          December 4, 2012


1.  Introduction

   Since the last century people participating in the IETF indulged
   themselves by sending messages to mailing list.  These messages can
   still be read as they are publicly accessible.  Some of these message
   document the war of words and the numerous personal disagreements
   that happened during the development of Internet protocols. 

   This document discusses about a mailing list protocol.  This protocol
   is not a protocol for communication devices.  It is a code of
   courtesy that the reader may wish to extend to others to facilitate
   the exchange of opinions and ideas, and to facilitate mailing list
   discussions.


2. Mailing list protocol

   When you write a message to a mailing list, remember that anyone in
   the world can read it.

   It is better not to send heated messages ("flames") to a mailing list
   even if you are provoked.  Wait a day before sending a response to a
   mailing list if you strongly disagree.

   If you are forwarding a message to a mailing list, do not change the
   wording.  If the message was a personal message to you and you are
   sending it to a mailing list, ask for permission first.

   It is a good idea to at least check all the mailing list messages
   about the subject before responding to a message.  

   Trim the email addresses to which the message is addressed when
   replying if the messages have become a two-way conversation.

   Be brief without being overly terse.  When replying to a message,
   include enough original material to be understood but no more.  It is
   easier to read a message when a quote indicator (>) is used to
   indicate quoted lines.

   It is bad form to simply reply to a message by including all the
   previous message: edit out all the irrelevant material.

   Use subject heading which reflects the content of the message.

   The people with whom you communicate are located across the world. 
   Give them the time to read their email before assuming the email
   didn't arrive or that they don't care.  If you think the importance
   of a message justifies it, immediately reply briefly to a message to
 


S. Moonesamy              Expires June 7, 2013                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Mailing list protocol          December 4, 2012


   let the sender know you got it, even if you will send a longer reply
   later.

   Read the mailing lists for a few weeks before you post anything. 
   This helps you to get an understanding of the culture of the group.

3. Internationalization Considerations

   The recipient is a human being whose culture, language, and humor is
   different from your own.  Date formats, measurements, and idioms can
   easily be misunderstood.  Be especially careful with sarcasm.

   "Reasonable" expectations for conduct via email depend on your
   relationship to a person and the context of the communication.  Norms
   learned in a particular email environment may not apply in general to
   your email communication with people across the Internet.  Be careful
   with slang or local acronyms.

4. Security Considerations

   It is not possible to recall or delete a message once it has been
   posted to a mailing list.  Think carefully before sending private or
   confidential information to a mailing list.

5. IANA Considerations

   This document does not request any action from IANA.

6.  Acknowledgements

   Most of the text in Sections 2 and 3 of this document is based on RFC
   1855 authored by Sally Hambridge.

7.  References


   7.1.  Informative References

   [RFC1855]  Hambridge, S., "Netiquette Guidelines", FYI 28, RFC 1855,
              October 1995.








 


S. Moonesamy              Expires June 7, 2013                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Mailing list protocol          December 4, 2012


Authors' Addresses

   S. Moonesamy
   76, Ylang Ylang Avenue
   Quatre Bornes
   Mauritius

   EMail: sm+ietf@elandsys.com











































S. Moonesamy              Expires June 7, 2013                  [Page 5]
