Network Working Group                                      G. Bernstein  
Internet Draft                                        Grotto Networking 
Intended status: Standards Track                              Sugang Xu 
                                                                   NICT 
Expires: August 2010                                              Y.Lee 
                                                                 Huawei 
                                                          Hiroaki Harai 
                                                                   NICT 
                                                                        
                                                      February 24, 2010 
 
                                      
       Signaling Extensions for Wavelength Switched Optical Networks 
                draft-bernstein-ccamp-wson-signaling-06.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 24, 2010. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors.  All rights reserved.  

    

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect 
 
 
                       Expires August 24, 2010                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must 
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of 
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as 
   described in the Simplified BSD License. 

Abstract 

This memo provides extensions to Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
Switching (GMPLS) signaling for control of wavelength switched optical 
networks (WSON).  Such extensions are necessary in WSONs under a number 
of conditions including: (a) when optional processing, such as 
regeneration, must be configured to occur at specific nodes along a 
path, (b) where equipment must be configured to accept an optical signal 
with specific attributes, or (c) where equipment must be configured to 
output an optical signal with specific attributes. In addition this memo 
provides mechanisms to support distributed wavelength assignment with 
bidirectional LSPs, and choice in distributed wavelength assignment 
algorithms. These extensions build on previous work for the control of 
lambda and G.709 based networks. 

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction...................................................3 
   2. Terminology....................................................3 
   3. Requirements for WSON Signaling................................4 
      3.1. WSON Signal Characterization..............................4 
      3.2. Per LSP Network Element Processing Configuration..........5 
      3.3. Bi-Directional Distributed Wavelength Assignment..........5 
      3.4. Distributed Wavelength Assignment Support.................7 
      3.5. Out of Scope..............................................7 
   4. WSON Signal Traffic Parameters, Attributes and Processing......7 
      4.1. Traffic Parameters for Optical Tributary Signals..........7 
      4.2. Signal Attributes and Processing..........................7 
         4.2.1. Modulation Type sub-TLV..............................8 
         4.2.2. FEC Type sub-TLV....................................10 
         4.2.3. Regeneration Processing TLV.........................12 
   5. Bidirectional Lightpath using Same Wavelength.................13 
      5.1. Using LSP_ATTRIBUTES Object..............................13 
      5.2. Bidirectional Lightpath Signaling Procedure..............14 
      5.3. Backward Compatibility Considerations....................15 
 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

   6. Bidirectional Lightpath using Different Wavelengths...........15 
   7. RWA Related...................................................15 
      7.1. Wavelength Assignment Method Selection...................15 
   8. Security Considerations.......................................16 
   9. IANA Considerations...........................................16 
   10. Acknowledgments..............................................16 
   11. References...................................................17 
      11.1. Normative References....................................17 
      11.2. Informative References..................................17 
   Author's Addresses...............................................19 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................20 
   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................20 
    
1. Introduction 

   This memo provides extensions to Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS) signaling for control of wavelength switched 
   optical networks (WSON).  Fundamental extensions are given to permit 
   simultaneous bi-directional wavelength assignment while more advanced 
   extensions are given to support the networks described in [WSON-
   Frame] which feature connections requiring configuration of input, 
   output, and general signal processing capabilities at a node along a 
   LSP 

   These extensions build on previous work for the control of lambda and 
   G.709 based networks.  

2. Terminology 

   CWDM: Coarse Wavelength Division Multiplexing. 

   DWDM: Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing. 

   FOADM: Fixed Optical Add/Drop Multiplexer. 

   ROADM: Reconfigurable Optical Add/Drop Multiplexer. A reduced port 
   count wavelength selective switching element featuring ingress and 
   egress line side ports as well as add/drop side ports. 

   RWA: Routing and Wavelength Assignment. 

   Wavelength Conversion/Converters: The process of converting an 
   information bearing optical signal centered at a given wavelength to 
   one with "equivalent" content centered at a different wavelength. 
   Wavelength conversion can be implemented via an optical-electronic-
   optical (OEO) process or via a strictly optical process. 

 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

   WDM: Wavelength Division Multiplexing. 

   Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSON): WDM based optical 
   networks in which switching is performed selectively based on the 
   center wavelength of an optical signal. 

   AWG: Arrayed Waveguide Grating. 

   OXC: Optical Cross Connect. 

   Optical Transmitter: A device that has both a laser tuned on certain 
   wavelength and electronic components, which converts electronic 
   signals into optical signals.  

   Optical Responder: A device that has both optical and electronic 
   components. It detects optical signals and converts optical signals 
   into electronic signals.  

   Optical Transponder: A device that has both an optical transmitter 
   and an optical responder. 

   Optical End Node: The end of a wavelength (optical lambdas) lightpath 
   in the data plane.  It may be equipped with some optical/electronic 
   devices such as wavelength multiplexers/demultiplexer (e.g. AWG), 
   optical transponder, etc., which are employed to transmit/terminate 
   the optical signals for data transmission. 

    

3. Requirements for WSON Signaling 

   The following requirements for GMPLS based WSON signaling are in 
   addition to the functionality already provided by existing GMPLS 
   signaling mechanisms.  

3.1. WSON Signal Characterization 

   WSON signaling MUST convey sufficient information characterizing the 
   signal to allow systems along the path to determine compatibility and 
   perform any required local configuration. Examples of such systems 
   include intermediate nodes (ROADMs, OXCs, Wavelength converters, 
   Regenerators, OEO Switches, etc...), links (WDM systems) and end 
   systems (detectors, demodulators, etc...). The details of any local 
   configuration processes are out of the scope of this document. 

   From [WSON-Frame] we have the following list of WSON signal 
   characteristic information: 
 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

                    List 1. WSON Signal Characteristics 

  1. Optical tributary signal class (modulation format).  
  2. FEC: whether forward error correction is used in the digital stream 
     and what type of error correcting code is used 
  3. Center frequency (wavelength)  
  4. Bit rate 
  5. G-PID: General Protocol Identifier for the information format  
    
   The first three items on this list can change as a WSON signal 
   traverses a network with regenerators, OEO switches, or wavelength 
   converters. An ability to control wavelength conversion already 
   exists in GMPLS signaling along with the ability to share client 
   signal type information (G-PID). In addition, bit rate is a standard 
   GMPLS signaling traffic parameter. It is referred to as Bandwidth 
   Encoding in [RFC3471]. This leaves two new parameters: modulation 
   format and FEC type, needed to fully characterize the optical signal. 
    
3.2. Per LSP Network Element Processing Configuration 

   In addition to configuring a network element (NE) along an LSP to 
   input or output a signal with specific attributes, we may need to 
   signal the NE to perform specific processing, such as 3R 
   regeneration, on the signal at a particular NE.  In [WSON-Frame] we 
   discussed three types of processing not currently covered by GMPLS: 

     (A) Regeneration (possibly different types) 

     (B) Fault and Performance Monitoring  

     (C) Attribute Conversion 

   The extensions here MUST provide for the configuration of these types 
   of processing at nodes along an LSP. 

    

3.3. Bi-Directional Distributed Wavelength Assignment 

   WSON signaling MAY support distributed wavelength assignment 
   consistent with the wavelength continuity constraint for bi-
   directional connections. The following two cases MAY be separately 
   supported: (a) Where the same wavelength is used for both upstream 


 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

   and downstream directions, and (b) Where different wavelengths can be 
   used for both upstream and downstream directions.  

   The need for the same wavelength on both directions mainly comes from 
   the color constraint on some edges' hardware. In fact, the edges can 
   be classified into two types, i.e. without and with the wavelength-
   port mapping re-configurability.  

   Without the mapping re-configurability at edges, the edge nodes must 
   use the same wavelength in both directions.  For example, (1) 
   transponders are only connected to AWGs (i.e. multiplexer/de-
   multiplexer) ports directly and fixedly, or (2) transponders are 
   connected to the add/drop ports of ROADM and each port is mapped to a 
   dedicated wavelength fixedly.  

   On the other hand, with the mapping re-configurability at edges, the 
   edge nodes can use different wavelengths in different directions. For 
   example, in edge nodes, transponders are connected to add/drop ports 
   of colorless ROADM. Thus, the wavelength-port remapping problem can 
   be solved locally by appropriately configuring the colorless ROADM. 
   If the colorless ROADM consists of OXC and AWGs, the OXC is 
   configured appropriately.  

   The edges of data-plane in WSON can be constructed in different types 
   based on cost and flexibility concerns.  Without re-configurability 
   we should consider the constraint of the same wavelength usage on 
   both directions, but have lower costs. While, with wavelength-port 
   mapping re-configurability we can relax the constraint, but have 
   higher costs.  

   These two types of edges will co-exist in WSON mesh, till all the 
   edges are unified by the same type. The existence of the first type 
   edges presents a requirement of the same wavelength usage on both 
   directions, which must be supported.   

   Moreover, if some carriers prefer an easy management lightpath usage, 
   say use the same wavelength on both directions to reduce the burden 
   on lightpath management, the same wavelength usage would be 
   beneficial. 

   In cases of equipment failure, etc., fast provisioning used in quick 
   recovery is critical to protect Carriers/Users against system loss. 
   This requires efficient signaling which supports distributed 
   wavelength assignment, in particular when the centralized wavelength 
   assignment capability is not available. 


 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

3.4. Distributed Wavelength Assignment Support 

   WSON signaling MAY support the selection of a specific distributed 
   wavelength assignment method. 

   As discussed in the [WSON-Frame] a variety of different wavelength 
   assignment algorithms have been developed. A number of these are 
   suitable for use in distributed wavelength assignment. This feature 
   would allow the specification of a particular approach when more than 
   one are implemented in the systems along the path. 

3.5. Out of Scope 

   This draft does not address signaling information related to optical 
   impairments.  

4. WSON Signal Traffic Parameters, Attributes and Processing 

   As discussed in [WSON-Frame] single channel optical signals used in 
   WSONs are called "optical tributary signals" and come in a number of 
   classes characterized by modulation format and bit rate. Although 
   WSONs are fairly transparent to the signals they carry, to ensure 
   compatibility amongst various networks devices and end systems it can 
   be important to include key lightpath characteristics as traffic 
   parameters in signaling [WSON-Frame].  

4.1. Traffic Parameters for Optical Tributary Signals 

   In [RFC3471] we see that the G-PID (client signal type) and bit rate 
   (byte rate) of the signals are defined as parameters and in [RFC3473] 
   they are conveyed Generalized Label Request object and the RSVP 
   SENDER_TSPEC/FLOWSPEC objects respectively.  

4.2. Signal Attributes and Processing 

   Section 3.2. gave the requirements for signaling to indicate to a 
   particular NE along an LSP what type of processing to perform on an 
   optical signal or how to configure that NE to accept or transmit an 
   optical signal with particular attributes.  

   One way of accomplishing this is via a new EXPLICIT_ROUTE subobject. 
   Reference [RFC3209] defines the EXPLICIT_ROUTE object (ERO) and a 
   number of subobjects, while reference [RFC5420] defines general 
   mechanisms for dealing with additional LSP attributes. Although 
   reference [RFC5420] defines a RECORD_ROUTE object (RRO) attributes 
   subobject, it does not define an ERO subobject for LSP attributes.  

 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

   Regardless of the exact coding for the ERO subobject conveying the 
   input, output, or processing instructions. This new "processing" 
   subobject would follow a subobject containing the IP address, or the 
   interface identifier [RFC3477], associated with the link on which it 
   is to be used along with any label subobjects [RFC3473]. 

   The contents of this new "processing" subobject would be a list of 
   TLVs that could include: 

   o  Modulation Type TLV (input and/or output) 

   o  FEC Type TLV (input and/or output) 

   o  Processing Instruction TLV 

   Currently the only processing instruction TLV currently defined is 
   for regeneration. Possible encodings and values for these TLV are 
   given in below. 

4.2.1. Modulation Type sub-TLV 

   The modulation type sub-TLV may come in two different formats: a 
   standard modulation field or a vendor specific modulation field. Both 
   start with the same 32 bit header shown below. 

      0                   1                   2                   3 
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     |S|I|     Modulation ID           |        Length               | 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    

   Where S bit set to 1 indicates a standardized modulation format and S 
   bit set to 0 indicates a vendor specific modulation format. The 
   length is the length in bytes of the entire modulation type field. 

   Where I bit set to 1 indicates an input modulation format and where I 
   bit set to 0 indicates an output modulation format. Note that the 
   source modulation type is implied when I bit is set to 0 and that the 
   sink modulation type is implied when I bit is set to 1. For signaling 
   purposes only the output form (I=0) is needed. 

   The format for the standardized type is given by: 




 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                 [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

      0                   1                   2                   3 
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     |1|I|        Modulation ID         |          Length            | 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     |   Possible additional modulation parameters depending upon    | 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     :   the modulation ID                                           : 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    

      Modulation ID 

   Takes on the following currently defined values: 

      0        Reserved 

      1        optical tributary signal class NRZ 1.25G 

      2        optical tributary signal class NRZ 2.5G 

      3        optical tributary signal class NRZ 10G 

      4        optical tributary signal class NRZ 40G 

      5        optical tributary signal class RZ 40G 

   Note that future modulation types may require additional parameters 
   in their characterization.  

   The format for vendor specific modulation is given by: 

      0                   1                   2                   3 
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     |0|I|    Vendor Modulation ID     |           Length             | 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     |                       Enterprise Number                       | 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     :   Any vendor specific additional modulation parameters        : 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    

   Vendor Modulation ID 

     This is a vendor assigned identifier for the modulation type. 

 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                 [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

   Enterprise Number 

     A unique identifier of an organization encoded as a 32-bit integer. 
     Enterprise Numbers are assigned by IANA and managed through an IANA 
     registry [RFC2578]. 

   Vendor Specific Additional parameters 

     There can be potentially additional parameters characterizing the 
     vendor specific modulation. 

    

4.2.2. FEC Type sub-TLV 

   The FEC Type TLV indicates the FEC type output at particular node 
   along the LSP. The FEC type sub-TLV comes in two different types: a 
   standard FEC field or a vendor specific FEC field. Both start with 
   the same 32 bit header shown below. 

      0                   1                   2                   3 
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     |S|I|       FEC ID                |        Length               | 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     |   Possible additional FEC parameters depending upon           | 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     :   the FEC ID                                                  : 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    

   Where S bit set to 1 indicates a standardized FEC format and S bit 
   set to 0 indicates a vendor specific FEC format. The length is the 
   length in bytes of the entire FEC type field. 

   Where the length is the length in bytes of the entire FEC type field. 

   Where I bit set to 1 indicates an input FEC format and where I bit 
   set to 0 indicates an output FEC format. Note that the source FEC 
   type is implied when I bit is set to 0 and that the sink FEC type is 
   implied when I bit is set to 1. Only the output form (I=0) is used in 
   signaling. 

   The format for standard FEC field is given by: 

    

 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

      0                   1                   2                   3 
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     |1|I|        FEC ID               |           Length            | 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     |   Possible additional FEC parameters depending upon           | 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     :   the FEC ID                                                  : 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    

      Takes on the following currently defined values for the standard 
   FEC ID [G.709, G.975.1]: 

      0        Reserved 

      1        G.709 RS FEC  

      2        G.709V compliant Ultra FEC 

      3       G.975.1 Concatenated FEC 
              (RS(255,239)/CSOC(n0/k0=7/6,J=8)) 

      4       G.975.1 Concatenated FEC (BCH(3860,3824)/BCH(2040,1930)) 

      5        G.975.1 Concatenated FEC (RS(1023,1007)/BCH(2407,1952)) 

      6       G.975.1 Concatenated FEC (RS(1901,1855)/Extended Hamming 
              Product Code (512,502)X(510,500)) 

      7       G.975.1 LDPC Code 

      8       G.975.1 Concatenated FEC (Two orthogonally concatenated 
              BCH codes) 

      9       G.975.1 RS(2720,2550) 

      10      G.975.1 Concatenated FEC (Two interleaved extended BCH 
              (1020,988) codes)  

      Where RS stands for Reed-Solomon and BCH for Bose-Chaudhuri-
      Hocquengham.  

    

    

 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

   The format for vendor-specific FEC field is given by: 

    

      0                   1                   2                   3 
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     |0|I|         Vendor FEC ID           |          Length          | 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     |                       Enterprise Number                       | 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     :   Any vendor specific additional FEC parameters               : 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    

   Vendor FEC ID 

     This is a vendor assigned identifier for the FEC type. 

   Enterprise Number 

     A unique identifier of an organization encoded as a 32-bit integer. 
     Enterprise Numbers are assigned by IANA and managed through an IANA 
     registry [RFC2578]. 

   Vendor Specific Additional FEC parameters 

     There can be potentially additional parameters characterizing the 
     vendor specific FEC. 

4.2.3. Regeneration Processing TLV 

   The Regeneration Processing TLV is used to indicate that this 
   particular node is to perform the specified type of regeneration 
   processing on the signal.  

   0                   1                   2                   3 
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
     |  T  | C |                 Reserved                            | 
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
      

   Where T bit indicates the type of regenerator: 

      T=0: Reserved 

 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

      T=1: 1R Regenerator 

      T=2: 2R Regenerator 

      T=3: 3R Regenerator 

   Where C bit indicates the capability of regenerator: 

      C=0: Reserved 

      C=1: Fixed Regeneration Point 

      C=2: Selective Regeneration Pools  

   Note that the use of the C field is optional in signaling. 

5. Bidirectional Lightpath using Same Wavelength 

   With the wavelength continuity constraint in CI-incapable [RFC3471] 
   WSONs, where the nodes in the networks cannot support wavelength 
   conversion, the same wavelength on each link along a unidirectional 
   lightpath should be reserved.  Per the definition in [RFC3471], a 
   bidirectional lightpath can be seen as a pair of unidirectional 
   lightpaths, which are provisioned along the same route simultaneously 
   by the RSVP-TE signaling with Upstream Label and Label Set Objects in 
   the messages [RFC3473]. This does not necessarily require the same 
   wavelength in both directions. 

   In addition to the wavelength continuity constraint, requirement 3.2 
   gives us another constraint on wavelength usage in data plane, in 
   particular, it requires the same wavelength to be used in both 
   directions. 

   The simplest and efficient way is to only define an extension to the 
   processing of Label Set [RFC3473], and leave the other processes 
   untouched.  The issues related to this new functionality including an 
   LSP_ATTRIBUTES object defined in [RFC5420] and the new procedure are 
   described in the following sections. This approach would have a lower 
   blocking probability and a shorter provisioning time.  In cases of 
   equipment failure, etc., fast provisioning used in quick recovery is 
   critical to protect Carriers/Users against system loss. 

5.1. Using LSP_ATTRIBUTES Object 

   To trigger the new functionality at each GMPLS node, it is necessary 
   to notify the receiver the new type lightpath request.  One multi-
   purpose flag/attribute parameter container object called 
 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

   LSP_ATTRIBUTES object and related mechanism defined in [RFC5420] meet 
   this requirement. One bit in Attributes Flags TLV which indicates the 
   new type lightpath, say, the bidirectional same wavelength lightpath 
   will be present in an LSP_ATTRIBUTES object.  Please refer to 
   [RFC5420] for detailed descriptions of the Flag and related issues. 

5.2. Bidirectional Lightpath Signaling Procedure  

   Considering the system configuration mentioned above, it is needed to 
   add a new function into RSVP-TE to support bidirectional lightpath 
   with same wavelength on both directions. 

   The lightpath setup procedure is described below: 

   1. Ingress node adds the new type lightpath indication in an 
      LSP_ATTRIBUTES object.  It is propagated in the Path message in 
      the same way as that of a Label Set object for downstream; 

   2. On reception of a Path message containing both the new type 
      lightpath indication in an LSP_ATTRIBUTES object and Label Set 
      object, the receiver of message along the path checks the local 
      LSP database to see if the Label Set TLVs are acceptable on both 
      directions jointly.  If there are acceptable wavelengths, then 
      copy the values of them into new Label Set TLVs, and forward the 
      Path message to the downstream node.  Otherwise the Path message 
      will be terminated, and a PathErr message with a "Routing 
      problem/Label Set" indication will be generated; 

   3. On reception of a Path message containing both such a new type 
      lightpath indication in an LSP_ATTRIBUTES object and an Upstream 
      Label object, the receiver MUST terminate the Path message using 
      a PathErr message with Error Code "Unknown Attributes TLV" and 
      Error Value set to the value of the new type lightpath TLV type 
      code; 

   4. On reception of a Path message containing both the new type 
      lightpath indication in an LSP_ATTRIBUTES object and Label Set 
      object, the egress node verifies whether the Label Set TLVs are 
      acceptable, if one or more wavelengths are available on both 
      directions, then any one available wavelength could be selected.  
      A Resv message is generated and propagated to upstream node; 

   5. When a Resv message is received at an intermediate node, if it is 
      a new type lightpath, the intermediate node allocates the label 
      to interfaces on both directions and update internal database for 
      this bidirectional same wavelength lightpath, then configures the 
      local ROADM or OXC on both directions. 
 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

   Except the procedure related to Label Set object, the other processes 
   will be left untouched. 

    

5.3. Backward Compatibility Considerations 

   Due to the introduction of new processing on Label Set object, it is 
   required that each node in the lightpath is able to recognize the new 
   type lightpath indication Flag carried by an LSP_ATTRIBUTES object, 
   and deal with the new Label Set operation correctly.  It is noted 
   that this new extension is not backward compatible. 

   According to the descriptions in [RFC5420], an LSR that does not 
   recognize a TLV type code carried in this object MUST reject the Path 
   message using a PathErr message with Error Code "Unknown Attributes 
   TLV" and Error Value set to the value of the Attributes Flags TLV 
   type code. 

   An LSR that does not recognize a bit set in the Attributes Flags TLV 
   MUST reject the Path message using a PathErr message with Error Code 
   "Unknown Attributes Bit" and Error Value set to the bit number of the 
   new type lightpath Flag in the Attributes Flags.The reader is 
   referred to the detailed backward compatibility considerations 
   expressed in [RFC5420]. 

    

6. Bidirectional Lightpath using Different Wavelengths 

   TBD 

7. RWA Related 

7.1. Wavelength Assignment Method Selection 

   As discussed in [HZang00] a number of different wavelength assignment 
   algorithms maybe employed. In addition as discussed in [WSON-Frame] 
   the wavelength assignment can be either for a unidirectional 
   lightpath or for a bidirectional lightpath constrained to use the 
   same lambda in both directions. A simple TLV could be used to 
   indication wavelength assignment directionality and wavelength 
   assignment method. This would be placed in an LSP_REQUIRED_ATTRIBUTES 
   object per [RFC5420]. The use of a TLV in the LSP required attributes 
   object was pointed out in [Xu]. 


 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

   [TO DO: The directionality stuff needs to be reconciled with the 
   earlier material] 

   Directionality: 0 unidirectional, 1 bidirectional 

   Wavelength Assignment Method: 0 unspecified (any), 1 First-Fit, 2 
   Random, 3 Least-Loaded (multi-fiber).  Others TBD. 

       0                   1                   2                   3 
       0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
      |    Direction  |    WA Method  |           Reserved            | 
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    

 

8. Security Considerations 

   This document has no requirement for a change to the security models 
   within GMPLS and associated protocols. That is the OSPF-TE, RSVP-TE, 
   and PCEP security models could be operated unchanged.  
    
   However satisfying the requirements for RWA using the existing 
   protocols may significantly affect the loading of those protocols. 
   This makes the operation of the network more vulnerable to denial of 
   service attacks. Therefore additional care maybe required to ensure 
   that the protocols are secure in the WSON environment.  
    
   Furthermore the additional information distributed in order to 
   address the RWA problem represents a disclosure of network 
   capabilities that an operator may wish to keep private. Consideration 
   should be given to securing this information.  

    

9. IANA Considerations 

   TBD. Once finalized in our approach we will need identifiers for such 
   things and modulation types, modulation parameters, wavelength 
   assignment methods, etc... 

10. Acknowledgments 

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot. 


 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

11. References 

11.1. Normative References 

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [RFC2578] McCloghrie, K., Perkins, D., and J. Schoenwaelder, 
             "Structure of Management Information Version 2 (SMIv2)", 
             STD 58, RFC 2578, April 1999. 

   [RFC3209] Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V., 
             and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP 
             Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 2001. 

   [RFC3471] Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
             (GMPLS) Signaling Functional Description", RFC 3471, 
             January 2003. 

   [RFC3473] Berger, L., Ed., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
             Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-
             Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473, 
             January 2003. 

   [RFC3477] Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "Signalling Unnumbered Links 
             in Resource ReSerVation Protocol - Traffic Engineering 
             (RSVP-TE)", RFC 3477, January 2003. 

   [RFC5420] Farrel, A., Ed., Papadimitriou, D., Vasseur, J.-P., and A. 
             Ayyangar, " Encoding of Attributes for MPLS LSP 
             Establishment Using Resource Reservation Protocol Traffic 
             Engineering (RSVP-TE)", RFC 5420, February 2006. 

11.2. Informative References 

   [WSON-CompOSPF] Y. Lee, G. Bernstein, "OSPF Enhancement for Signal 
             and Network Element Compatibility for Wavelength Switched 
             Optical Networks", work in progress: draft-lee-ccamp-wson-
             signal-compatibility-OSPF. 

   [WSON-Frame] G. Bernstein, Y. Lee, W. Imajuku, "Framework for GMPLS 
             and PCE Control of Wavelength Switched Optical Networks", 
             work in progress: draft-bernstein-ccamp-wavelength-
             switched-03.txt, February 2008. 



 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

   [HZang00] H. Zang, J. Jue and B. Mukherjeee, "A review of routing and 
             wavelength assignment approaches for wavelength-routed 
             optical WDM networks", Optical Networks Magazine, January 
             2000. 

   [Xu]     S. Xu, H. Harai, and D. King, "Extensions to GMPLS RSVP-TE 
             for Bidirectional Lightpath the Same Wavelength", work in 
             progress: draft-xu-rsvpte-bidir-wave-01, November 2007. 

   [Winzer06]    Peter J. Winzer and Rene-Jean Essiambre, "Advanced 
             Optical Modulation Formats", Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 
             94, no. 5, pp. 952-985, May 2006. 

   [G.709]  ITU-T Recommendation G.709, Interfaces for the Optical 
             Transport Network(OTN), March 2003. 

   [G.959.1] ITU-T Recommendation G.959.1, Optical Transport Network 
             Physical Layer Interfaces, March 2006. 

   [G.975.1] ITU-T Recommendation G.975.1, Forward error correction for 
             high bit-rate DWDM submarine systems, February, 2004. 

   [G.694.1] ITU-T Recommendation G.694.1, Spectral grids for WDM 
             applications: DWDM frequency grid, June 2002. 

   [G.694.2] ITU-T Recommendation G.694.2, Spectral grids for WDM 
             applications: CWDM wavelength grid, December 2003. 

   [G.Sup43] ITU-T Series G Supplement 43, Transport of IEEE 10G base-R 
             in optical transport networks (OTN), November 2006. 

   [RFC4427] Mannie, E., Ed., and D. Papadimitriou, Ed., "Recovery 
             (Protection and Restoration) Terminology for Generalized 
             Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS)", RFC 4427, March 
             2006. 












 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

Author's Addresses 

   Greg M. Bernstein (editor) 
   Grotto Networking 
   Fremont California, USA 
    
       
   Phone: (510) 573-2237 
   Email: gregb@grotto-networking.com 
    
   Nicola Andriolli 
   Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy 
   Email: nick@sssup.it 
    
   Alessio Giorgetti 
   Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy 
   Email: a.giorgetti@sssup.it 
    
   Lin Guo  
   Key Laboratory of Optical Communication and Lightwave Technologies 
   Ministry of Education  
   P.O. Box 128, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,  
   P.R.China  
   Email: guolintom@gmail.com 
    
   Hiroaki Harai 
   National Institute of Information and Communications Technology 
   4-2-1 Nukui-Kitamachi, Koganei,  
   Tokyo, 184-8795 Japan  
    
   Phone: +81 42-327-5418  
   Email: harai@nict.go.jp 
    
   Yuefeng Ji  
   Key Laboratory of Optical Communication and Lightwave Technologies 
   Ministry of Education  
   P.O. Box 128, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,  
   P.R.China  
   Email: jyf@bupt.edu.cn 
    
   Daniel King 
   Old Dog Consulting 
    
   Email: daniel@olddog.co.uk 
    
   Young Lee (editor) 
   Huawei Technologies 
 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                [Page 19] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 100 
   Plano, TX 75075 
   USA 
    
   Phone: (972) 509-5599 (x2240) 
   Email: ylee@huawei.com 
 

   Sugang Xu 
   National Institute of Information and Communications Technology 
   4-2-1 Nukui-Kitamachi, Koganei,  
   Tokyo, 184-8795 Japan  
    
   Phone: +81 42-327-6927  
   Email: xsg@nict.go.jp 
 

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of 
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be 
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
   described in any IETF Document or the extent to which any license 
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it 
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any 
   such rights.  

   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF 
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or 
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or 
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or 
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR 
   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please 
   address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Disclaimer of Validity 

   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are provided 
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                [Page 20] 

Internet-Draft        WSON Signaling Extensions           February 2010 
    

   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 







































 
 
Bernstein et al.       Expires August 24, 2010                [Page 21] 

