Audio/Video Transport Working Group                            S. Ikonin 
Internet Draft                                                SPIRIT DSP
Intended status: Informational                              May 20, 2009


RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec draft-ietf-avt-rtp-ipmr-04.txt

Status of this Memo

This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
authors. All rights reserved.

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of publication of this 
document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info). Please review these 
documents carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
respect to this document.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

This Internet-Draft will expire on November 20, 2009.


Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


Abstract 

This document specifies the payload format for packetization of SPIRIT 
IP-MR encoded speech signals into the Real-time Transport Protocol 
(RTP). The payload format supports transmission of multiple frames per 
payload and introduced redundancy for robustness against packet loss.

Table of Contents 

 1. Introduction......................................................3
 2. IP-MR Codec Description...........................................3
 3. Payload Format....................................................4
    3.1. RTP Header Usage.............................................4
    3.2. Payload Format Structure.....................................5
    3.3. Payload Header...............................................5
    3.4. Speech Table of Contents.....................................6
    3.5. Speech Data..................................................7
    3.6. Redundancy Header............................................7
    3.7. Redundancy Table of Contents.................................8
    3.8. Redundancy Data..............................................9
 4. Payload Examples..................................................9
    4.1. Payload Carrying a Single Frame..............................9
    4.2. Payload Carrying Multiple Frames with Redundancy............10
 5. Media Type Registration..........................................11
    5.1. Registration of media subtype audio/ip-mr_v2.5..............11
    5.2. Mapping Media Type Parameters into SDP......................12
 6. Security Considerations..........................................13
 7. Congestion Control...............................................13
 8. IANA Considerations..............................................14
 9. Normative References.............................................15
 10. Author(s) Information ..........................................15
 11. Disclaimer......................................................15
 12. Legal Terms.....................................................16


Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


1. Introduction

This document specifies the payload format for packetization of SPIRIT 
IP-MR encoded speech signals into the Real-time Transport Protocol 
(RTP). The payload format supports transmission of multiple frames per
payload and introduced redundancy for robustness against packet loss.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC 2119]. 

2. IP-MR Codec Description 

The IP-MR codec is scalable adaptive multi-rate wideband speech codec 
designed by SPIRIT for use in IP based networks. These codec is suitable
for real time communications such as telephony and videoconferencing. 

The codec operates on 20 ms frames at 16 kHz sampling rate and has an 
algorithmic delay of 25ms. 

The IP-MR supports six wide band speech coding modes with respective bit 
rates ranging from about 7.7 to about 34.2 kbps. The coding mode can be 
changed at any 20 ms frame boundary making possible to dynamically 
adjust the speech encoding rate during a session to adapt to the varying
transmission conditions. 

The coded frame consists of multiple coding layers - base (or core) 
layer and several enhancement layers which are coded independently. 
Onlythe core layer is mandatory to decode understandable speech and
upper layers provide quality enhancement. These enhancement layers 
may be omitted and remaining base layer can be meaningfully decoded
without artifacts. This making the bit stream scalable and allows 
reduce bit rate during transmission without re-encoding. 

This memo specifies an optional form of redundancy coding within RTP 
for protection against packet loss. It is based on commonly known 
scheme when previously transmitted frames are aggregated together 
with new ones. Each frame is retransmitted once in the following 
RTP payload packet. f(n-2)...f(n+4) denote a sequence of speech 
frames, and p(n-1)...p(n+4) a sequence of payload packets: 

   --+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--
     | f(n-2) | f(n-1) |  f(n)  | f(n+1) | f(n+2) | f(n+3) | f(n+4) |
   --+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--

      <---- p(n-1) ---->
               <----- p(n) ----->
                        <---- p(n+1) ---->
                                 <---- p(n+2) ---->
                                          <---- p(n+3) ---->
                                                   <---- p(n+4) ---->


Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


But because of the scalable nature of IP-MR codec there is no need to 
duplicate the whole previous frame - only the core layer may be 
retransmitted. This reduces redundancy overhead while keeping 
efficiency. Moreover, the speech bits encoded in core layer are divided
on six classes (from A to F) of perceptual sensitivity to errors. Using 
these classes as introduced redundancy make possible to adjust trade-off
between overhead and robustness against packet loss. 

The mechanism described does not really require signaling at the session 
setup. The sender is responsible for selecting an appropriate amount of 
redundancy based on feedback about the channel conditions. 

The main codec characteristics can be summarized as follows: 

    o Wideband, 16 kHz, speech codec 

    o Adaptive multi rate with six modes from about 7.7 to about 
      34.2 kbps 

    o Bit rate scalable 

    o Variable bit rate changing in accordance with actual speech 
      content 

    o Discontinuous Transmission (DTX), silence suppression and 
      comfort noise generation 

    o In-band redundancy scheme for protection against packet loss 

3. Payload Format

The main purpose of the payload design for IP-MR is to maximize the 
potential of the codec with as minimal overhead as possible. The payload
format allows changing parameters of the codecs  (such as bit rate, 
level of scalability, DTX and redundancy mode) without re-negotiation
at any packet boundary. This make possible dynamically adjust streaming 
parametersin accordance to changing network conditions. The payload 
format also supports aggregation of multiple consecutive frames 
(up to 4) in a payload. That allows controlling trade-off between 
delay and header overhead.

3.1. RTP Header Usage 

The RTP timestamp corresponds to the sampling instant of the first 
sample encoded for the first frame-block in the packet. The timestamp 
clock frequency SHALL be 16 kHz. The duration of one frame is 20 ms, 
corresponding to 320 samples at 16 kHz. Thus the timestamp is increased 
by 320 for each consecutive frame. The timestamp is also used to recover 
the correct decoding order of the frame-blocks.


Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


The RTP header marker bit (M) SHALL be set to 1 whenever the first 
frame-block carried in the packet is the first frame-block in a 
talkspurt (see definition of the talkspurt in Section 4.1 [RFC 3551]).
For all other packets, the marker bit SHALL be set to zero (M=0).

The assignment of an RTP payload type for the format defined in this 
memo is outside the scope of this document. The RTP profiles in use 
currently mandate binding the payload type dynamically for this payload
format. This is basically necessary because the payload type expresses 
the configuration of the payload itself, i.e. basic or interleaved mode, 
and the number of channels carried.

The remaining RTP header fields are used as specified in [RFC 3550].

3.2. Payload Format Structure 

The IP-MR payload format consists of a payload header with general 
information about packet, a speech table of contents (TOC), and speech
data. An optional redundancy section follows after speech data. The 
redundancy section consists of redundancy header, redundancy TOC and 
redundancy data payload. 

The following diagram shows the standard payload format layout:

  +---------+--------+--------+- - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - +
  | payload | speech | speech | redundancy | redundancy | redundancy |
  | header  | TOC    | data   | header     | TOC        | data       |
  +---------+--------+--------+- - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - +

3.3. Payload Header 

The payload header has the following format:

                           0                   1
                           0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
                          +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
                          |T| CR  | BR  |D|A|GR |R|
                          +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

    o T (1 bit): Reserved compatibility with future extensions. SHOULD 
      be set to 0. 


Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


    o CR (3 bits): coding rate of frame(s) in this packet, as per the 
       following table: 
                          +-------+--------------+
                          |  CR   | avg. bitrate |
                          +-------+--------------+
                          |   0   |   7.7 kbps   |
                          |   1   |   9.8 kbps   |
                          |   2   |  14.3 kbps   |
                          |   3   |  20.8 kbps   |
                          |   4   |  27.9 kbps   |
                          |   5   |  34.2 kbps   |
                          |   6   |  (reserved)  |
                          |   7   |   NO_DATA    |
                          +-------+--------------+

The CR value 7 (NO_DATA) indicates that there is no speech data (and 
speech TOC accordingly) in the payload. This MAY be used to transmit 
redundancy data only. The value 6 is reserved. If receiving this value 
the packet SHOULD be discarded. 

    o BR (3 bits): base rate for core layer of frame(s) in this packet 
      using the table for CR. Values in the range 0-5 indicate bitrates 
      for core layer, same as for packet SHOULD be discarded. The base 
      rate is the lowest rate for scalability, so speech payload can 
      be scaled down not lower than BR value. If a received packet has 
      BR > CR then during decoding it will be assumed that BR = CR. 

    o D (1 bit): indicates if the DTX mode is allowed or not. 

    o A (1 bit): byte-aligned payload. If A=1 then all speech frames 
      MUST be byte-aligned. This mode speeds up speech data access. 
      The A=0 value specifies bandwidth-efficient mode with no byte 
      alignment(including end of header). 

    o GR (2 bits): number of frames in packet (grouping size). Actual 
      grouping size is GR + 1, thus maximum grouping supported is 4. 

    o R (1 bit): redundancy presence bit. If R=1 then the packet 
      contains redundancy information for lost packets recovery. 
      In this case after speech data the redundancy section is present. 

3.4. Speech Table of Contents 

The speech TOC contains entries for each frame in packet (grouping size
in total). Each entry contains a single field: 

                                   0
                                  +-+
                                  |E|
                                  +-+


Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


    o E (1 bit): frame existence indicator. If set to 0, this indicates 
      the corresponding frame is absent and the receiver should set 
      special LOST_FRAME flag for decoder. This can be followed by the
      lost frame itself or by empty frames generated by the encoder 
      during silence intervals in DTX mode. 

Note that if CR flag from payload header is 7 (NO_DATA) then speech TOC 
is empty. 

3.5. Speech Data 

Speech data of a payload contains one or more speech frames or comfort 
noise frames, as specified in the speech TOC of the payload. 

Each speech frame represents 20 ms of speech encoded with the rate 
indicated in the CR and base rate indicated in BR field of the payload 
header. 
The size of coded speech frame is variable due to the nature of codec. 
The Encoder's algorithm decides what size of each frame is and returns 
it after encoding. In order to save bandwidth the size is not placed 
into payload obviously. Decoder can calculate frame size by its content
and returns it to the top level application. This way a size of each 
frame can be obtained. Moreover, there is a special service function 
that returns frame size without total decoding which may be used for 
this purpose.

3.6. Redundancy Header 

If a packet contains redundancy (R field of payload header is 1) the 
speech data is followed by redundancy header: 

                             0 1 2 3 4 5
                            +-+-+-+-+-+-+
                            | CL1 | CL2 |
                            +-+-+-+-+-+-+

Redundancy header consists of two fields. Each field contains class 
specifier for amount of redundancy partly taken from the preceding 
packet (CL1) and pre-preceding packet (CL2), e.g. distant from the 
current packet by 1 and 2 packets accordingly. The values are listed 
in the table below: 


Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


                     +-------+-------------------+
                     |  CL   | amount redundancy |
                     +-------+-------------------+
                     |   0   |       NONE        |
                     |   1   |      CLASS A      |
                     |   2   |      CLASS B      |
                     |   3   |      CLASS C      |
                     |   4   |      CLASS D      |
                     |   5   |      CLASS E      |
                     |   6   |      CLASS F      |
                     |   7   |     (reserved)    |
                     +-------+-------------------+


Each specifier takes 3 bits, thus the total redundancy header size is 6 
bits. 

3.7. Redundancy Table of Contents 


                    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
                    | Pkt1 Entries| Pkt2 Entries|
                    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+


The redundancy TOC contains entries for redundancy frames from preceding 
and pre-preceding packets. Each entry takes 1 bit like speech TOC entry 
(3.3):

                                   0
                                  +-+
                                  |E|
                                  +-+


    o E (1 bit): frame existence indicator. If set to 0, this indicates 
      the corresponding frame is absent. 

    o For each preceding and pre-preceding packet the number of entries 
      is equal to the grouping size of the current packet. E.g. maximum 
      number of entries is 4*2 = 8. 

    o If class specifier in the redundancy header is CL=0 (NO_DATA) 
      then there is no entries for corresponding packet redundancy. 



Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


3.8. Redundancy Data 

Redundancy data of a payload contains redundancy information for one or 
more speech frames or comfort noise frames that may be lost during 
transition, as specified in the redundancy TOC of the payload. Actually 
redundancy is the most important part of preceding frames representing 
20 ms of speech. This data MAY be used for partial reconstruction of 
lost frames. The amount of available redundancy is specified by CL flag 
in redundancy header section (3.5). This flag SHOULD be passed to 
decoder. The length of redundancy frame is variable and can be 281 
calculated after decoding. 

4. Payload Examples 

A few examples to highlight the payload format follow. 


4.1. Payload Carrying a Single Frame 

The following diagram shows a standard IP-MR payload carrying a single 
speech frame without redundancy:


   0                   1                   2                   3
   0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |0|CR=1 |BR=0 |0|0|0 0|0|1|sp(0)                                |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                                                               |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                                                               |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                                                               |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                                                               |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                                                               |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                      sp(193)|P|
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+


In the payload the speech frame is not damaged at the IP origin (E=1), 
the coding rate is 9.7 kbps(CR=1), the base rate is 7.8 kbps (BR=0), and 
the DTX mode is off. There is no byte alignment (A=0) and no redundancy 
(R=0). The encoded speech bits - s(0) to s(193) - are placed immediately 
after TOC. Finally, one zero bit is added at the end as padding to make 
the payload byte aligned. 


Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


4.2. Payload Carrying Multiple Frames with Redundancy 

The following diagram shows a payload that contains three frames, one of 
them with no speech data. The coding rate is 7.7 kbps (CR=0), the base 
rate is 7.7 kbps (BR=0), and the DTX mode is on. The speech frames are 
byte aligned (A=1), so 1 zero bit is added at the end of the header. 
Besides the speech frames the payload contains six redundancy frames 
(three per each delayed packet). 


The first speech frame consists of bits sp1(0) to sp1(92). After that 3 
bits are added for byte alignment. The second frame does not contain any 
speech information that is represented in the payload by its TOC entry. 
The third frame consists of bits sp3(0) to sp3(171). 


The redundancy header follows after speech data. The one-packet- delayed 
redundancy contains class A+B bits (CL1=2), and two-packet- delayed 
redundancy contains class A bits (Cl2=1). The one-packet- delayed 
redundancy contains three frames with 20, 39 and 35 bits respectively. 


The first frame of two-packet-delayed redundancy is absent, it is 
represented in its TOC entry, and two other frames have sizes 15 and 19 
bits. 


Note that all speech frames are padded with zero bits for byte 
alignment. 


Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


   0                   1                   2                   3
   0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |0|CR=0 |BR=0 |1|1|1 0|1|1 0 1|P|sp1(0)                         |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                                                               |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                                                               |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                  sp1(92)|P|P|P|sp3(0)                         |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                                                               |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                                                               |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                                                               |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                                                               |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |                                               sp3(171)|P|P|P|P|
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |CL1=2|CL2=1|1 1 1|0 1 1|red1_1(0)                    red1_1(19)|
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |red1_2(0)                                                      |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |   red1_2(38)|red1_3(0)                                        |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |         red1_3(34)|red2_2(0)          red2_2(14)|red2_3(0)    |
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
  |             red2_3(18)|P|P|P|P|
  +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+


5. Media Type Registration 

This section describes the media types and names associated with this 
payload format. 


5.1. Registration of media subtype audio/ip-mr_v2.5 

Type name: audio 

Subtype name: ip-mr_v2.5 

Required parameters: none 

Optional parameters: 


Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


* ptime: Gives the length of time in milliseconds represented by the 
media in a packet. Allowed values are: 20, 40, 60 and 80. 

Encoding considerations: This media type is framed binary data (see RFC 
4288, Section 4.8). 

Security considerations: See RFC 3550 [RFC 3550]

Interoperability considerations: none 

Published specification: RFC XXXX 

Applications that use this media type: Real-time audio applications like 
voice over IP and teleconference, and multi-media streaming. 

Additional information: none 

Person & email address to contact for further information: 
Elena Berlizova 
berlizova@spiritdsp.com 

Intended usage: COMMON 

Restrictions on usage: This media type depends on RTP framing, and hence 
is only defined for transfer via RTP [RFC 3550]. 

Author: 
Sergey Ikonin <ikonin@spiritdsp.com> 

Change controller: IETF Audio/Video Transport working group delegated 
from the IESG. 


5.2. Mapping Media Type Parameters into SDP 


The information carried in the media type specification has a specific 
mapping to fields in the Session Description Protocol (SDP) [RFC 4566], 
which is commonly used to describe RTP sessions. When SDP is used to 
specify sessions employing the IP-MR codec, the mapping is as follows: 

    o The media type ("audio") goes in SDP "m=" as the media name. 

    o The media subtype (payload format name) goes in SDP "a=rtpmap" 
    as the encoding name. The RTP clock rate in "a=rtpmap" MUST 16000. 

    o The parameter "ptime" goes in the SDP "a=ptime" attributes. 
    


Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


Any remaining parameters go in the SDP "a=fmtp" attribute by copying 
them directly from the media type parameter string as a semicolon- 
separated list of parameter=value pairs. 

Note that the payload format (encoding) names are commonly shown in 
upper case. Media subtypes are commonly shown in lower case. These 
names are case-insensitive in both places. 

6. Security Considerations 

RTP packets using the payload format defined in this specification
are subject to the security considerations discussed in the RTP 
specification [RFC 3550] and in any applicable RTP profile. The main
security considerations for the RTP packet carrying the RTP payload
format defined within this memo are confidentiality, integrity, and 
source authenticity. Confidentiality is achieved by encryption of the
RTP payload. Integrity of the RTP packets is achieved through a suitable
cryptographic integrity protection mechanism. Such a cryptographic 
system may also allow the authentication of the source of the payload.

A suitable security mechanism for this RTP payload format should 
provide confidentiality, integrity protection, and at least source 
authenticationcapable of determining if an RTP packet is from a 
member of the RTP session.

Note that the appropriate mechanism to provide security to RTP and 
payloads following this memo may vary. It is dependent on the 
application, the transport, and the signaling protocol employed. 
Therefore, a single mechanism is not sufficient, although if suitable,
usage of the Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP) [RFC 3711] is 
recommended.  Other mechanisms that may be used are IPsec [RFC 4301] 
and Transport Layer Security (TLS) [RFC 5246] (RTPover TCP); other 
alternatives may exist.

This payload format does not exhibit any significant non-uniformity in 
the receiver side computational complexity for packet processing, and 
thus is unlikely to pose a denial-of-service threat due to the receipt 
of pathological data.

7. Congestion Control

The general congestion control considerations for transporting RTP data
apply; see RTP [RFC 3550] and any applicable RTP profile like AVP 
[RFC 3551]. However, the multi-rate capability of IP-MR speech coding 
provides a mechanism that may help to control congestion, since the 
bandwidth demand can be adjusted by selecting a different encoding mode.


Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


The bit rate scalability of IP-MR codec allows reducing voice traffic 
by omitting enhancement layers without re-encoding. This provides 
additional means for congestion control. Some intermediate network 
node MAY modify the IP-MR RTP payload by dropping some of the layers 
during transmission to meet the available bandwidth requirements. In 
case the payload is forwarded with modified content at least the base 
layer MUST be preserved in the payload which is being delivered to 
receiving side guarantees meaningful speech decoding without packet 
loss concealment procedure.

The number of frames encapsulated in each RTP payload highly 
influences the overall bandwidth of the RTP stream due to header
overhead constraints. Packetizing more frames in each RTP payload
can reduce the number of packets sent and hence the overhead from 
IP/UDP/RTP headers, at the expense of increased delay.

If in-band redundancy scheme is used to protect against packet loss, 
the amount of introduced redundancy will need to be regulated so that 
the use of redundancy itself does not cause a congestion problem. In 
other words, a sender SHALL NOT increase the total bitrate when adding 
redundancy in response to packet loss, and needs instead to adjust it 
down in accordance to the congestion control algorithm being run. Thus,
when adding redundancy, the media bitrate will need to be reduced to 
provide room for the redundancy.

8. IANA Considerations 

One media type has been defined and needs registration in the media 
types registry. 



Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


9. Normative References 

  [RFC 2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
             
  [RFC 3550] Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and 
             V. Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
             Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003. 
             
  [RFC 3551] Schulzrinne, H. and S. Casner, "RTP Profile for Audio
             and Video Conferences with Minimal Control", STD 65,
             RFC 3551, July 2003.

  [RFC 4566] Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session 
             Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

  [RFC 3711] Baugher, M., McGrew, D., Naslund, M., Carrara, E., Norrman,
             K., "The Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol (SRTP)", RFC
             3711, March 2004.

  [RFC 5246] Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer
             Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2", RFC 5246,
             August 2008.

  [RFC 4301] Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the
             Internet Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005.


10. Author(s) Information 

Sergey Ikonin 

email: ikonin@spiritdsp.com

Russia 109004 
Building 27, A. Solgenizyn street  
Tel: +7 495 661-2178 
Fax: +7 495 912-6786 


11. Disclaimer 

This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF 
Contributions published or made publicly available before November 10, 
2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this material 
may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow modifications of 
such material outside the IETF Standards Process. Without obtaining an 
adequate license from the person(s) controlling the copyright in such 
materials, this document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards 
Process, and derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF 
Standards Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to 
translate it into languages other than English. 

Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009


12. Legal Terms 

All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are provided on 
an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in any 
IETF Document or the extent to which any license under such rights might 
or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has made any 
independent effort to identify any such rights. 

Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat 
and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification 
can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary rights 
that may cover technology that may be required to implement any standard 
or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please address the 
information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

The definitive version of an IETF Document is that published by, or 
under the auspices of, the IETF. Versions of IETF Documents that are 
published by third parties, including those that are translated into 
other languages, should not be considered to be definitive versions of 
IETF Documents. The definitive version of these Legal Provisions is that 
published by, or under the auspices of, the IETF. Versions of these 
Legal Provisions that are published by third parties, including those 
that are translated into other languages, should not be considered to be 
definitive versions of these Legal Provisions. 

For the avoidance of doubt, each Contributor to the IETF Standards 
Process licenses each Contribution that he or she makes as part of the 
IETF Standards Process to the IETF Trust pursuant to the provisions of 
RFC 5378. No language to the contrary, or terms, conditions or rights 
that differ from or are inconsistent with the rights and licenses 
granted under RFC 5378, shall have any effect and shall be null and 
void, whether published or posted by such Contributor, or included with 
or in such Contribution. 


Ikonin                 Expires November 20, 2009               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft   RTP Payload Format for IP-MR Speech Codec      May 2009